[master < T0728-MG]  Add docs for temporal types (#217)
memgraph/docs: docs/reference-guide/temporal_types/overview.md

---
id: overview
title: Temporal types
sidebar_label: Temporal types overview
slug: /reference-guide/temporal_types/
---

> Temporal types can be stored as properties of a graph. The user can use cypher queries or write/read procedures to write/read these properties. The following table summarizes the temporal types that memgraph currently supports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporal types can be stored as properties of a vertex or edge. The user can use cypher queries or write/read procedures to write/read these properties. The following table summarizes the temporal types that memgraph currently supports:
```

name|description|
:-:|:-:
Duration|Data type that represents a duration.|/
Date|Data type that represents a date.|/
LocalTime|Data type that represents local time.|/
LocalDateTime|Data type that represents a date and local time.|/

Note, that all the types excluding Durations are ISO 8601 compliant

## Duration
You can create `Duration` from a string or a map by calling the function `Duration`.

For strings, the duration format is:

`P[nD]T[nH][nM][nS]` n stands for number which can be a fraction  and the capital letters are used as separator with each field in `[]` being optional. For strings, Memgraph only allows one field to be of type double. However, for maps, every field can be a double, an int or a mixture of both. Note, we support negative durations.

> Symbol table

Reviewer: I would either convert this to a sub-heading or remove it. The same true for `Duration(/date/locatime/localdatetime) properties`

```cypher
CREATE (:F1Laps {AIR123 : duration({minute:2, seconds:2, microseconds:33})})
```

At this point, it must be pointed out that durations internally hold microseconds. Each of the fields specified above are first converted to microseconds and then reduced by addition to a single value. This has an interesting use case:

```cypher
CREATE (:F1Laps {AIR123 : duration({minute:2, seconds:-2, microseconds:-33})})
```
This converts minutes, seconds to microseconds and effectively produces the following equation: `minutes - seconds - microseconds`. 

Duration properties:
You can access the individual fields of durations through their properties as follows:

name|description
:-:|:-:
day|This converts all the microseconds to days and returns them.|/
hour|This subtracts days and returns the leftover as hours.|/
minute|This subtracts the days and returns the leftover as minutes.|/
second|This subtracts the days and returns the leftover as seconds.|/
millisecond|This subtracts the days and returns the leftover as milliseconds.|/
microsecond|This subtracts the days and returns the leftover as microseconds.|/
nanosecond|This subtracts the days and returns the leftover as nanoseconds.|/

> Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example:
```

```cypher
MATCH (f:F1Laps) RETURN f.AIR123.minute 
```

## Date
You can create `Date` from a string or map by calling the function `Date`. For strings, the date format is specified by the ISO 8601:

`YYYY-MM-DD` or `YYYYMMDD` or `YYYY-MM`

Symbol table:

name|description
:-:|:-:
Y|Year|/
M|Month|/

> S|Second|/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
D|Date|/
```

The lowest year is `0` and the highest is `9999`.

Example:
```cypher

> CREATE (:Birthdays {Arnold : date("1947-07-30")})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE (:Person {birthday : date("1947-07-30")})
```
This make a bit more sense in my opinion, but feel free to leave as is.

Symbol table:

name|description
:-:|:-:
|Y|Year|/
|M|Month|/
|D|Day|/
|h|Hours|/
|m|Minutes|/
|s|Seconds|/

Example:
```cypher
CREATE (:Flights {AIR123 : LocalDateTime("2021-10-05T14:15:00")})
```
For maps the following fields are available: `year`, `month`, `day`, `hour`, `minute`, `second`, `millisecond` and `microsecond`

Example:
```cypher
CREATE (:Flights {AIR123 : LocalDateTime(year:2021, month:10, day:5, hour:14, minute:15)})
```
LocalDateTime properties:
You can access the individual fields of LocalDateTime through its properties:

name|description
:-:|:-:
year|Returns the year field|/
month|Returns the month field|/
day|Returns the day field|/
hour|Returns the hour field|/
minute|Returns the minute field|/
second|Returns the second field|/
millisecond|Returns the millisecond field|/
microsecond|Returns the microsecond field|/

Example:
```cypher
MATCH (f:Flights) RETURN f.AIR123.year
```
## Temporal types arithmetic

Temporal types support native arithmetic and the operations are summarized in the following table:

Duration operations: 

op|result
:-:|:-:
duration + duration|duration|/
duration - duration|duration|/

> -duration|negation|/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-duration|duration|/
```

Eveywhere else the result is a type, therefore the negation feels strange to me.

Date operations: 

op|result
:-:|:-:
date + duration|date|/

> duration + date|date|/

Reviewer: Why the `duration + x` is only present for dates? If I am not mistaken this should either work for everything else or non of them.

date - duration|date|/
date - date|duration|/

LocalTime operations: 

op|result
:-:|:-:
localtime + duration|localtime|/
localtime - duration|localtime|/
localtime - localtime|duration|/

LocalDateTime operations: 

operation|result
:-:|:-:
localdatetime + duration|localdatetime|/
localdatetime - duration|localdatetime|/
localdatetime - localdatetime|duration|/

## Procedures API

> Temporal types can be used with query procedures. You can find the documentation in the following pages:
> 
> [C API](/reference-guide/query-modules/api/c-api.md)
> 
> [Pyhon API](/reference-guide/query-modules/api/python-api.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporal types can also be used within query modules, you can find the regarding documentation on the [Pyhon API](/reference-guide/query-modules/api/python-api.md) and [C API](/reference-guide/query-modules/api/c-api.md) pages.
```
